So, um, I've been seeing, um, a lot of people recently using Mel Brooks as a sort of blanket defense of any kind of, you know, satire that transgresses societal taboos.
Um, and, you know, this is nothing new. I've been seeing, uh, Mel Brooks used in this way for decades.
You couldn't make a Mel Brooks movie today
Cause I saw Blazing Saddles yesterday
But the, um, the problem with that line of thinking is, uh, it misunderstands what made Mel Brooks great.
What makes him resonate. So today, we're gonna talk about Mel Brooks.
The year was 2004.
Are you gonna eat your tots?
The United States had just invaded Iraq. The Black Eyed Peas were getting retarded in here.
Let's get retarded. Let's get retarded in here.
Zach Braff was at his artistic peak.
Blah blah blah blah blah.
And The Producers was still one of the hottest tickets on Broadway.
Stand alone, stand behind me.
Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick had returned to the roles which they had originated, which had netted a then record-breaking 12 Tonys.
Student Rush tickets were really cheap back then, so I was seeing every musical that I could on Broadway.
But to this day, I have never laughed harder at any stage production than at that original cast of Mel Brooks' The Producers in 2004.
Come on Germans, go into your dance.
And if you've only seen the movie adaptation of the stage musical, you might be wondering, really?
Work, work, work. Work, work, work.
And, yes.
I can't even really explain what was lost in translation in the movie adaptation of the musical.
It's functionally identical.
Perhaps too identical, because everything that made it work on stage, it just doesn't work on film.
They come here, they all come here.
How do they find me?
That the aesthetics of breaking the fourth wall on film are just different than on stage.
Why bloom go so far, camera right?
The stage musical is also a big love letter to the heydays of the 40s and 50s musical pageantry,
and the world of the stage in general.
We all love this thing called the theater.
The movie version either did not know how to capture this, or did not care to capture this on film.
But maybe it's just being in the same room with these world-class trained showgirls tap dancing in stormtrooper outfits is just hilarious.
We're on screen, it's like, it just feels tired.
It feels like we've been here before.
That is why they call me Rolf.
Don't be stupid, be a smarty, come and join the Nazi party.
So if you guys want to talk about Mel Brooks and where, when, and how he was a comedy innovator,
then let's talk about Mel Brooks.
Mel Brooks was born Melvin Kaminsky in Brooklyn, New York in 1926.
His father died when he was two, and the youngest of four boys, he was a small sickly kid who got picked on a lot.
Brooks would later go on to say that this was where he learned to use comedy as a defense mechanism, to cloak his pain in humor.
I want to thank Hitler for being such a funny guy on stage.
Mel Brooks would also like you to know that he is a Jew.
Jews in space!
Behind me you see a phalanx, an avalanche of Jews who have come with their...
We're Jews out in space.
We're zooming along, protecting the Hebrew race.
I don't like the way you're walking.
You've been into the sacramental wine again.
Then go and attack us.
We'll give them a smack, we'll slap them right back in the face.
After serving as a corporal in World War II in Germany, engaging in such operations as defusing landmines,
Brooks was hired by Sid Caesar to be a television comedy writer.
It was during this period as a television writer that Brooks developed his comedy ethos,
which is basically throw everything at the wall and see what sticks.
Halt!
Du hast gespritzt eine General?
You see this in his most popular movies. It's just joke after joke after joke.
If there is a dud, there is hardly time for it to land before the next joke starts.
Well, that's the end of this suit.
So while Brooks definitely had an ethos, biases, and a point of view in his comedy,
the rapid-fire nature of it kind of make it clear that he didn't think through the implications of a lot of it.
You've just entered the territory of Robin Hood and his merry men.
Fagolith?
No, no, no. We're straight. Just merry.
Some of Brooks' comedy, with gay characters in particular, has aged poorly.
While Brooks was certainly not averse to physical comedy and slapstick,
Fag! Fag! Fagol! Fagol!
his bread-and-butter tended to rest more on transgression of societal taboos.
Some of it has aged well.
Come on. How about a good ol' motherfucker work song?
I get no kick from champagne.
Some of it has not.
Watch me faggot!
And here's why that doesn't bother me personally as a viewer.
Comedy is the quickest to age and the most likely to age poorly.
Yes, some of it, even a lot of it, is problematic.
Yes, you can still enjoy it. I do.
His 1974 film Blazing Saddles is one of the great transgressive comedies of all time.
Here we take the good time and trouble to slaughter every last Indian in the West, and for what?
So they can appoint a sheriff that's blacker than any Indian.
From top to bottom, Blazing Saddles is a razor-sharp skewering of the absurdity of racism.
These are people of the land.
The common clay of the New West.
You know.
Morons.
And this is part of what makes Brooks so fondly remembered today, where the likes of, say, David Zucker are kind of sad.
Well, people still think airplane is funny, so there's that.
I picked the wrong week to quit sniffing glue.
As an outgrowth from his difficult childhood, Brooks wasn't just about comedy for comedy's sake.
Comedy could be a weapon.
And one of Brooks' favorite targets happened to be history's greatest monster.
Hitler on ice!
Brooks saw comedy not just as a weapon of ridicule, but as a way of robbing Hitler of his posthumous power.
Brooks' approach of reducto ad absurdum to Nazis was a catharsis for Jewish identity.
And this hardly started with Brooks.
Yiddish folklore is full of these trickster, Bugs Bunny-style characters who confront corrupt and unjust power structures using nothing but their wits,
Herschel Vostropol being one of the most well-known.
The Inquisition!
Look out, Sam!
We have a mission to convert the Jews!
Brooks' subjects also weren't limited to Nazi violence against the Jews.
Take one of the more famous scenes from History of the World, Part 1.
It's better to lose your skullcap than your skull!
Or your guvalt!
There you have Brooks' own filmmaking light of a period of history that, while nowhere near the Holocaust in terms of scale,
still openly targeted Jewish citizens.
And it's debatable how mining Jewish suffering, even if you are Jewish, for comedy in the Spanish Inquisition differs from the Holocaust,
which Brooks has always avoided depicting directly.
But he has also gone on record as saying that the root of a lot of his humor is anger,
specifically anger at anti-Semitism.
The problem with this kind of media, created by a Jew as an expression of Jewish identity,
to be consumed largely, however, by a Gentile audience is that
the Goliath will always watch you, watch you, watch you, watch you, watch you, watch you.
And there's a little bit of troubling history of things that Jews say and do being misrepresented and used against them.
Let's go back now, way back, back before Brooks, to what laid the groundwork for Springtime for Hitler,
to even survive and thrive in the first place.
Yes, let's go back to the big H in question.
Film about World War II was box office gold before the United States even entered the war,
and most everything that came out during that time glorified the war machine just as much as anything Germany was sharting out.
Film and literature about the war were used to boost a narrative of American exceptionalism and greatness.
According to Thomas Doherty,
But while this American ascendancy was fueled by images of the machine of war,
little confronted the actual ideology of fascism or the true horrors perpetrated in the name of Hitler's Reich.
One of the earliest and most well-known examples of satirizing Hitler's brand of fascism
came in the form of Charlie Chaplin's The Great Dictator.
A huge chunk of The Great Dictator is a very surreal watch today.
It consists of cute, wacky hijinks in the Jewish ghetto in the fictional country of Thomania.
See, concentration camps were certainly a thing in 1940, and it was a thing Americans knew about.
But the scope of it was not the scope we know today.
The Great Dictator was made in a time when Hitler's death machine was only a possibility and not a historical reality.
The Great Dictator is unique not only in that it confronts Hitler's ideology,
But that it also puts Hitler's biggest targets, the Jews, at the forefront.
But Chaplin gives neither Hitler nor the Nazis even the dignity of being named.
The German analog Adnoid Hinkel is not even given a language.
The Great Dictator dictates in gibberish.
But the Jews are given a name.
The Great Dictator does not pussyfoot around about who, exactly, Adnoid Hinkel intends to exterminate.
The Jews are given a name and an identity, where Hitler is only alluded to.
A less well-known WWII-era comedy following in Chaplin's footsteps was Ernst Lubitsch's To Be or Not to Be,
which follows the exploits of Jews in occupied Warsaw.
Mel Brooks loved this movie so much that he remade it in the 80s,
and that did not go over as well as the producers or Blazing Saddles.
While The Great Dictator was a success, it was not without controversy,
with resistance against the film coming from isolationist Americans and fascist sympathizers.
Despite the success of The Great Dictator, few in Hollywood dared follow in Chaplin's footsteps
by openly addressing Hitler's ideology.
But this did not go on to start a trend of films that were terribly concerned with the plight of the Jews in Germany
and the rest of Europe because, believe it or not,
Americans weren't terribly sympathetic to the plight of the Jews in 1940.
To put it in perspective, Americans are more receptive to the idea of welcoming Syrian refugees into America today
than they were Jewish refugees in 1939.
There was a lot of WWII-themed media during and after the war,
but not a whole lot followed in Chaplin's footsteps.
In 1963, political theorist Hannah Arendt, herself a German Jew who fled the Reich during Hitler's rise to power,
reported on Adolf Eichmann's trial in Jerusalem in a series of essays for The New Yorker called
Eichmann in Jerusalem, a report on the banality of evil.
Eichmann, who was on trial for Nazi war crimes, showed no remorse and claimed no responsibility for what he had taken part in.
He was remarkable for his unremarkability.
The Israeli government sent no fewer than six psychologists to examine Eichmann,
none of whom found any trace of mental illness.
Arendt's essays discredited the idea that Nazi criminals were psychopathic or different from normal people.
As Eichmann saw it, he was just doing his job.
He not only obeyed orders, he also obeyed the law.
And then I maintain, in regard to the words discussed verbally, there was no place for discussions. These were orders.
Eichmann proved that you do not have to be a born and bred monster to do monstrous things, that anyone was capable of this.
Arendt's report, in addition to a wider cultural understanding in America of the breadth and scope of Hitler's atrocities,
began to cause a shift in the American relationship with the mere idea of war, especially with the looming threat in Vietnam.
Where earlier films about World War II seemed heroic and necessary,
this shift began to see such films' omissions of Hitler's atrocities as unpalatable.
There was a need to reconcile the humanity of the Nazis with their actions in order to continue making media about them.
But the reality that evil is really quite banal did not make for compelling Hollywood cinema.
According to Barlow, the nature of evil itself, argues Hannah Arendt, is thought-defying,
because thought tries to reach some depth, to go to the roots, and the moment it concerns itself with evil,
it is frustrated because there is nothing. That is its banality.
In the two decades following the end of the war, a changing understanding of Hitler's atrocities
and their relationship to the American identity would shape the way that Nazis were portrayed in film.
With regard to depicting the German Nazis seen by American film and culture,
Aaron Barlow outlines two phases, an initial one generated by the needs of war,
and a later one reacting to that earlier version.
A major characteristic of that later phase reacting to that earlier phase
was the attempt to grapple with the unthinkable evil encompassed by the Holocaust.
What about the rest of the world?
Did you not know the intentions of the Third Reich?
Did you not hear the words of Hitler's broadcast all over the world?
But an increasingly complex understanding of World War II, moving away from the machine of war
and moving towards the tragedy of the Holocaust,
begin to dampen American desires to see World War II portrayed on screen.
There's just no real glory in conquest when you know what those soldiers are going to discover
on the other side of those woods.
So exit Best Years of Our Lives and Sands of Iwo Jima,
enter The Diary of Anne Frank, The Pawnbroker, and Judgment at Nuremberg.
Where's the responsibility of the world leader Winston Churchill,
who said in an open letter to the London Times in 1938,
1938!
Your Honor!
Were England to suffer a national disaster,
I should pray to God to send a man of the strength of mind and will of an Adolf Hitler.
Are we now to find Winston Churchill guilty?
Part of the problem with attempts to come to terms with the unbelievable horrors of the Holocaust
also came to be an unwillingness to delve too deeply into the commonality of evil
that shows real negotiation with the American people's own culpability.
Where's the responsibility of those American industrialists
who helped Hitler to rebuild his armaments
and profited by that rebuilding?
Aaron Barlow contends that Americans began to push away the questions raised,
turning the perpetrators into unhuman villains,
into parodies of villainy,
into something that we can live with,
for it becomes absolutely removed from us.
Hollywood's later approach would escalate to the likes of Steven Spielberg
adding literal supernatural element to a seemingly supernatural evil
in films like Raiders of the Lost Ark.
We see this perhaps most explicitly with Captain America and Hydra,
where the Red Skull is posed as making the Nazis look like the lesser evil compared to Hydra,
even though from their look to their occult inspiration,
to their goals, to their goofy salute,
they are functionally identical to the Nazis.
Hang! Glider!
Also, Holocaust won't Holocaust.
But in the 1960s, at this still early stage in American identity
reconciling its relationship to the Holocaust,
the horrors were still too fresh for the kind of direct representation
we would see in the 90s and 2000s with the likes of Schindler's List,
The Pianist,
and Life is Beautiful.
Buongiorno, principessa!
Last night, I dreamt about you all night!
Ugh.
Finding a way to keep World War II narratives relevant and sympathetic
was proving increasingly difficult in light of the new cultural concerns,
and as the war receded even further and further into the past,
and possibilities for spectacle reached their limit.
Which is to say nothing about that other cloud hanging over the world at the time.
That mushroom cloud.
Doctor Strangelove, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb,
according to Pauline Kael, opened a new movie era.
Indeed, Strangelove seems to be where the switch flipped,
both in the wider culture's relationship to its past and to its doomed present,
in the film's own subtitle, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb.
And boy, you had to stop worrying and love the bomb in the 1960s just to live.
Like, today, we do not appreciate just how close we came several times to total nuclear war.
It's kind of a miracle we still exist.
The Nazi presence in Strangelove is more subtext than text,
with the titular Strangelove an implied former Nazi war criminal
who now works for the global nuclear war machine.
Strangelove can store all the information about the war.
The evil of the Nazi is almost trivial
when pitted against Cold War era global nuclear annihilation.
The effect of this was not to trivialize Nazism,
but to give filmmakers new tools with which to explore the horrors both of their past,
their present, and an increasingly unlikely future.
And if dark comedy and satire were used as a tool,
it would be a tool to make the world a better place.
It would be a tool to make the world a better place.
And if dark comedy and satire were used to come to terms with
the sort of Damocles hanging over the head of every American and Russian
and, well, everyone during the Cold War,
then so too could dark comedy be used to come to terms with
and explore the horrors of Hitler's Reich.
If he opens his big mouth again, it's lampshade time!
Shut up!
What? You written a book?
Yeah, it's like all my thoughts and stuff.
It's called I'm Can.
Andrew Gross and Suzanne Rohr describe the problem of comedy
tackling heavy subject matters as a perception of comedy being
generally considered less sophisticated, read, incapable,
than the more so-called noble genres such as tragedy or conventional historical drama.
Part of what makes a societal taboo a taboo is the presumption
that it should not be touched or discussed, even by higher arts,
much less lower arts like comedy.
All right, Jay, it's time to show these people what black power is all about.
You better put your hood on.
This, of course, does not give comedy, particularly black comedy, its due credit.
Black comedy is sometimes the best means for challenging
harmful societal constructs and mores.
According to Aaron Barlow, comedy is most persuasive,
which is perhaps to say instructive,
when put in the morally realistic context of tragic potential.
Thus, much of what is called black humor and its attendant obscenity
derives from the recognition that the truest fiction requires
fusion of the tragic and the comic.
What do you think of Mr. Hilton's policies?
Well, I don't like the sound of these here boncentration bamps.
Well, I gave him my baby to kiss and he bit it.
Farce allows obscenity to succeed or at least be dealt with.
In situations where otherwise, audiences would be offended and even non-existent.
Life's a piece of shit when you look at it.
It could be argued that farce was not only inevitable,
but necessary in order to prime audiences
for dealing with more realistic, somber portrayals in Holocaust fiction.
When used smartly, comedy puts the unspeakable
into understandable symbols through absurdism,
without dragging marginalized groups through the mud.
Through farce, the problems that were arising
within filmic presentations of the Nazi,
problems arising from new recognition
that the simplistic diversions into good and bad
that had been useful for the war effort,
but that were of little real validity,
could be sidestepped.
Prima facie evil, the Nazi could always be insulted and abused.
Or, turned around, the Nazi can lose without sympathy.
This turn to farce allowed World War II film to survive,
even as aspects of it that now seemed troubling
began to fade from the genre.
The late 1960s also saw a rise in films
that took a more farcical bent to approaching Hitler's regime,
including The Dirty Dozen, Hogan's Heroes, Catch-22,
and, of course, The Producers.
And now it's springtime for Hitler and Germany.
The Producers tells the story of Max Bialystock,
played by Zero Mostel,
a washed-up hack Broadway producer
who talks Leopold Blum, played by Gene Wilder,
a mousy, emasculated accountant who seeks comfort in his blanket
You're making me extremely nervous.
into creating an intentional Broadway flop
in order to ride off the business losses
and steal the money from the financiers.
But when the worst show they can find,
springtime for Hitler,
a gay romp with Adolf and Eva through Burt Scott,
becomes an unexpected success,
the two end up in prison.
One of the studios Brooks initially approached
said that they would make The Producers
if and only if Brooks changed it to springtime for Mussolini.
Why was it universal?
Because they said Hitler is too strong, too menacing.
How about springtime for Mussolini?
Given that Mussolini's depiction in American media
in comparison to Hitler
seemed mostly to be about making fun of fascism
and being BFFs with Hitler,
while not having to get our hands dirty
with that whole Holocaust thing.
And when we talk about The Producers now,
especially as a defense of a joke about...
whatever,
one facet of the gestation of The Producers
is that it was actually pretty controversial
upon initial release.
Time has been kinder to The Producers
than critics were in 1968.
The Busby Berkeley musical centerpiece
Springtime for Hitler
caused considerable offense,
prompting numerous, mostly Jewish, walkouts
during the film's initial release.
In Brooks' own words,
the Jews were horrified.
I received resentful letters of protest
saying things like,
how can you make jokes about Hitler?
The man murdered six million Jews.
It was only after Peter Sellers
gave the film a glowing public endorsement in Variety
that the film gradually built up a cult audience
and Brooks eventually won an Academy Award
for Best Original Screenplay for The Producers.
But while the joke in the film
is that Bialystock had found
the most offensive musical possible,
guaranteeing a flop in his mind...
It's practically a love letter to Hitler.
This won't run a week.
A week? Are you kidding?
This play has got to close on page four.
Brooks' use of Hitler as its subject
was not arbitrary.
In Brooks' own words,
of course it is impossible to take revenge
for six million murdered Jews,
but by using the medium of comedy,
we can try to rob Hitler of his posthumous power and myth.
Hitler must have had a magnetic, attractive force.
Like a rock star,
he used his voice to spellbind umpteen thousands of listeners,
so it's only fitting when comic actors
make him the limelight hog of world history.
We take away from him the holy seriousness
that always surrounded him
and protected him like a cordon.
Brooks later stated in an interview at 60 Minutes,
there is only one way to get even with Hitler.
You have to bring him down with ridicule.
Though The Producers was initially met with mixed reviews,
the film has since become celebrated
for the way it ridicules fascism
in the same vein as Chaplin's The Great Dictator,
particularly Springtime for Hitler.
Film historian Robert Reimer celebrates springtime
as a triumph of anti-fascist satire.
Susan Gubar interprets this parody of fascism
as racial camp mocking the shoddy theatricality of fascism.
Both Gubar and Reimer side with Brooks
in their interpretation of the springtime number.
That ridicule of Nazi propaganda methods
does rob Hitler of some of his posthumous power.
But again, this praise of The Producers is not universal.
Film historian Petra Rau
takes a much colder view on The Producers.
In addition to finding many of the comedic elements
thoughtless and hypocritical,
Talk about bad taste!
Like, what did these people expect
in a musical called Springtime for Hitler?
She particularly takes issue with Brooks' appropriation
of fascist imagery.
There is one frame during the Springtime for Hitler number
wherein the dancers move to form a swastika on the stage,
a direct reference to Leni Riefenstahl
doing the same in Nazi propaganda.
Rau argues that the tools of fascist theatricality
are not shoddy, as Brooks describes,
and are rather highly effective propaganda tools.
That's why they worked.
Merely recreating the tools of fascism
in a heightened, cartoonish state
is not enough to create satisfying satire.
And in that way, Brooks' use of Hitler
can feel almost incidental.
Really, making a play about the most offensive thing imaginable
could have been about anything,
since the butt of the joke is really Bialystock and Bloom
underestimating the audience, not Hitler himself.
So the question then becomes,
where does satire cross the line
from being a valid, transgressive art
that challenges harmful societal constructs
to too subtle and perhaps in danger
of people missing the point entirely?
And that's the problem.
There isn't a line.
This is a journey into money.
Loads of money.
There is an episode of Malcolm Gladwell's podcast,
Revisionist History, which is called The Satire Paradox,
which, with apologies, I will borrow from a great deal here.
Oi, you! Shut your mouth and look at my wad!
The episode begins with a discussion on Harry Enfield,
a well-known comedian in Britain
and also an avowed leftist who hated Margaret Thatcher.
No, Nigel, no. Bad dog, Nigel.
Enfield and his partner Paul Whitehouse
dreamt up a character to embody Thatcher's England.
And it sort of just became this sort of thing, really,
where we'd just go loads of money about everything, you know.
His name was Loads of Money.
He was a construction worker
who was subjected to sudden delirious wealth
by the 80s building boom.
So we sort of did it the other way,
which is just to go, look at me, aren't I great?
Isn't money great? Everything else is rubbish.
Only money is good.
But the lesson Enfield took from the whole thing was,
despite the clear derision with which Loads of Money was framed,
people only took it as it was intended
if they already were aligned with Enfield politically.
You know, I mean, it's great fun to do,
but generally, you know, it's just about questioning what's there
because we're allowed to question what's there, so we do.
But it doesn't ever change anyone's mind.
Same with Stephen Colbert.
The real Colbert has never made a secret
of the fact that he holds liberal political views in real life.
Everybody's been saying, has America lost its mind?
And the answer is, evidently, back off, buddy.
We got 300 million guns and we're kind of stressed right now.
But conservative viewers of The Colbert Report
don't see his character the same way liberal viewers do.
Yes, obviously, the Colbert of The Colbert Report was a character,
but where the left-leaning viewer sees a character to be mocked...
I'm sorry, I've never been a fan of books.
I don't trust them.
...the conservative-leaning viewer
sees a funny man speaking truth to power.
I think I would have made a fabulous press secretary.
I have nothing but contempt for these people.
So essentially, they saw what they wanted to see.
So the big takeaway here of this study was
that this is what we would call
motivated cognition, or biased perception.
See also Tina Fey's Sarah Palin.
I can see Russia from my house.
LAUGHTER
This character might have been made by and for liberals,
but Palin was just so darn likable
that conservatives who supported Palin
were endeared to it too.
Tina Fey even went on to make an episode of 30 Rock
about this very paradox.
I'm gonna have to take a moment here.
I sat on my testicles earlier
and the heft of my body smashed them to smithereens.
OK, start working on the wig.
The in-universe show's parody
of a dangerously inept political candidate
ends up making him more endearing.
Because it's making him likable.
He's actually very mean.
But with Tracy Jordan playing him...
He's a lovable buffoon.
...they're just talking about how funny Tracy is.
And Fey's character, Liz Lemon, is faced with the dilemma
of what to do with this.
But these are all examples of deliberate satire.
The issue gets even more thorny
when you look at representation that is not satire.
The white man marches on!
American History X is a great example
of the satire paradox for something that is not satire.
The text of the film
is explicitly anti-fascist.
A cautionary tale that unmistakably
condemns white supremacy.
But you know what group loves the imagery
in American History X?
Neo-Nazis.
Neo-Nazis love the imagery in this movie.
The text shows neo-nazism
and white supremacy is bad.
Isn't it also kind of badass?
Isn't it kind of cool
the way he's framed?
Isn't Edward Norton a badass when he's an
uncucked neo-nazi alpha?
And then there's Hans Landa
from Inglourious Basterds
who has become more of a symbol for fun
and charm and charisma
than of evil.
Ooh, that's a bingo!
And you might argue that
that's the point.
But what is that point if what people remember most
about the movie is how fun the evil nazi was?
Audiences might have lost the thread
of the intended point.
And then there's Tomorrow Belongs to Me
a chilling moment from the film version of Cabaret
which has recently been adopted by some white nationalists
as an anthem.
But do you know what hasn't?
So we have explicitly anti-fascist dramas
where the text has been appropriated
by white supremacists,
but in this case the comedy,
which satirically praises Hitler,
has not.
Which lends credence to Brooks' notion that
highlighting the absurdism of fascist theatricality
actually does rob Hitler of his posthumous power.
But just because you can't help
what the world will do with your representation,
be it satirical or non-satirical,
it doesn't mean that satire
is free from criticism.
Satire needs intent,
it needs logic,
it needs to be making a statement
about the thing it is satirizing,
or else it's bad satire.
Brooks describes this as satire
of the shoddy theatrics of fascism.
To Rao's credit, the theatrical techniques
of fascism were highly effective,
but they were also extremely fragile,
which is why the police state
maintained such a stranglehold on the press.
You weren't allowed to ridicule fascism in Nazi Germany
because its theatricality, at its core,
could not survive ridicule.
This is what hyper-nationalism looks like.
Women dressed as pretzels and beer.
This is what Nazi theatricality looks like.
Tap-dancing stormtroopers
and marching in swastika formation.
That image is lifted directly from Nazi propaganda,
and it doesn't take a lot of modification
to make it look ridiculous.
See, this particular scene is all about lens.
The Nazi vision in the producers
is a text written by a literal Nazi,
produced through a Jewish lens
for a Gentile audience.
The story, the framing,
and who is telling the story
is all relevant.
So this isn't just Hitler for Hitler's sake.
It's a theatricality that unmistakably showcases
the absurdity of ethno-nationalism.
Which is why white nationalists
tend not to like it in the way
that they like American history acts.
You can't make it not absurd.
So the idea that Brooks wanted to make a musical
out of the most offensive thing
and just kind of picked Nazis at random is false.
Brooks had something to say about the Nazis,
about the way they viewed themselves,
and the way they presented themselves to the world.
But this also rubs up against that satire paradox.
Perhaps the intended target of the satire
goes missed by a large portion of the audience.
Man, you know, I kind of miss the days
when it was, like, taken as a given
by most people that a joke
at the expense of Hitler
isn't the same as a joke
at the expense of millions of murdered Jews.
But, you know,
the times, they are a-changin',
and that's a discussion that needs to be had.
Hail Trump! Hail our people!
Hail victory!
Given the rise of far-right movements,
fascism, and neo-Nazism in the last two years
all over the Western world,
much debate has arisen as to the ethical concerns
of laughing at the devil, as Brooks has done.
Do films like the producers rob Nazis of their power,
or do they create an atmosphere
that encourages audiences not to take
a serious issue seriously?
It is fallacious to say
that the answer to that question
is either or. It's a little of
column A, and a little of column B.
The seriousness of the Holocaust
was not lost on Brooks, and according to Brooks,
all comedy must have limits
and intent. In the Spiegel interview,
Brooks says,
The philosophy of the film is,
people can get over anything.
No, they can't.
They can't get over a concentration camp.
So where does Brooks draw the line?
In 1974,
I produced the Western parody
Blazing Saddles, he continues,
in which the N-word was used constantly.
I've got it!
The N-word was used constantly.
I've gotta talk to you. Come here.
Have you gone berserk? Can't you see that that man
is a n Gerot!
But I would never have thought of the
idea of showing how a black was lynched.
It's only funny when he escapes
getting sent to the gallows.
Oh baby.
You are so talented.
And they are so dumb.
And there's been a lot of debate
as to whether or not Brooks' liberal use
of the N-word in Blazing Saddles is helpful
or harmful, and I'm not going to go into that today.
Good morning, ma'am.
And isn't it a lovely
morning?
Up your a**.
But the point here is
Brooks believes that not all
comedic targets are created equal.
Ah, prairie shit.
Everybody.
Comedy is by its very nature
transgressive, and borders and norms do
need to be challenged, even surrounding
such sensitive topics as the Holocaust.
But in order to be effective,
that transgression must be used
carefully and with intent.
The offense bar is also
much higher now, unlike with the original film
which caused a flurry of controversy,
when the Broadway show and subsequently
the adaptation of the musical got released,
these barely got an indifferent shrug on the issue
of depiction of Nazis. By this point,
even moms don't find it edgy.
We're in a post-South Park world,
a post-Family Guy world,
a post-Downfall meme world.
So perhaps Hitler
is too powerless, and when people
express concerns about literal Nazis
or Nazi-adjacent useful idiots,
applause
The responses
become, why do you have to call
everyone you disagree with a Nazi?
But this cartoonization of Nazism
is also a sign of changing times,
just like The Producers was a sign of
changing times in 1967.
And I'm not even saying that that's
a bad thing, but it is
having an effect on the way that we treat our
history. Media like South Park
reinforces a worldview where nothing really
matters and everything is fair game.
And South Park has historically gotten away with this
because the message and intent is clear.
But South Park's imitators seem not to understand
why South Park gets away with transgressive humor
with relatively little blowback,
and they don't. How is
your representation framed? Is it
romantic? Or is it derisive?
Or is it comedic?
And most importantly, at whose
expense is the joke?
All humor
is based on some form of transgression.
Even a pie in the
face is a very
tiny, tiny societal transgression.
I'm not saying don't
transgress, and I'm not saying
societal mores and constructs
don't need to be challenged. However,
if you are going to make a
joke at the expense of a
historically shat upon group that is not
your own, you need to accept also
that there might be consequences, and
people might not think you're funny.
1. There is no such thing as
equal opportunity offensive because not
all groups exist on equal footing.
Maybe one day. Probably never.
But right now, we are nowhere
near that. Brooks cited the near lynching of
Bart in Blazing Saddles as a line he would not
cross. There is nothing funny about the image
of a black man being lynched, and Brooks owns
the fact that he, a white Jewish comedian,
has no business depicting the
image of a black man being lynched used for
comedy. 2. Brooks is
not down with Gentiles appropriating Jewish
suffering and genocide, let alone
shocking for shocking's sake. And ridiculing
Hitler's theatricality is not the
same thing as making a joke about Jewish
genocide. It's just
not. Mel Brooks is a 91
year old man. He spends a lot of time
these days going on tour and jumping
around on stage doing interviews talking about what
a great guy Gene Wilder was, and
I hope he keeps doing that.
It was such a wonderful part of my life.
I hope he spends his twilight years
reflecting on his successes and doesn't
find out that a very large portion of the
Gentile internet is using him as a defense
for why Gentiles making anti-Semitic jokes
is really okay because all
satire is created equal.
Look at the producers, even if you only
call it satire after the fact because your joke
didn't land. So yeah, you can totally
joke about whatever. For the time being,
free speech is the law of the land.
But if you're looking for a defense for your edgelord
satire, maybe the Jewish man who
served in Germany during World War II
who has publicly spoken out against media
that trivializes the suffering of the Holocaust
who has stated several times
that there are lines that should not be crossed
out of respect for oppressed groups
who has maintained that comedy is a weapon
and even owing to the fact that you will fuck up
its targets should be considered
with caution and care and never with the intent
of upholding unjust power structures
rather than dismantling them.
Maybe this guy
this guy is not
your best defense.
You gotta know
is everything
is showbiz
I'll myself
watch
my show
I'm the German Ethel Merman, don't you know
We are crossing
borders, the New World Order
is here